=== Page 39 ===
 
35 
Computer Networks Laboratory 
Course Code: ISL57  Credits: 0:0:1 
Pre – requisites: NIL Contact Hours: 15P 
Course Coordinator: Charunayana V 
 
Course Content 
Part A: Implement the following using C/C++/Java 
   
1. Write a program to implement the internet checksum for detecting errors during data 
transfer in unreliable network. Demonstrate the generation of the checksum at sender site 
and verify for the correctness of the received data at the receiver site demonstrating the two 
cases – without error and with error.  
 
2. Write a program for implementing the error detection during data transfer in unreliable 
network code using 16-bit CRC Technique. Generate the codeword at sender site and verify 
for the correctness of the received codeword at the receiver site demonstrating the two cases 
– without error and with error.  
 
3. Write a program to find shortest paths from any node as source to all other nodes using 
Distance vector routing for any given graph (with atleast 5 nodes). Print the least cost and 
next node to reach all possible destinations from the selected source node.  
 
4. An essential requirement in managing congestion control is to regulate the data flow. Write 
a program to implement the traffic management at flow level by smoothing out the bursty 
traffic and ensuring a steady data out flow using Leaky Bucket Algorithm. Demonstrate the 
output in tabular format.  
 
5. Write a program to find shortest paths from any node as source to all other nodes using Link 
state routing for any given graph (with atleast 5 nodes). Print the least cost and next node 
to reach all possible destinations from the selected source node.  
 
6. Write a program to implement the simple sliding window in achieving flow control. 
Demonstrate the frame transmission within the window limit, waiting for 
acknowledgements and handle the cases of sliding the window or retransmission of window 
contents.  
 
7. Variable sized framing needs synchronization to ensure that data patterns do not conflict 
with control patterns. Write a program to demonstrate bit stuffing and unstuffing to achieve 
synchronization in variable sized frames at data link layer.  
 
8. Packets from different flows arrive at a switch or router for processing. A good scheduling 
technique treats the different flows in a fair and appropriate manner. Write a program to 
implement priority queuing as a technique to improve Quality of Service. Demonstrate the 
output using two queues with switch cases that includes enqueue, dequeue and display 
operations.  
 
9. Using TCP/IP sockets, write a client-server program to make client send the file name and 
the server to send ba ck the contents of the requested file name “sample.txt” with the 
=== Page 40 ===
 
36 
following contents: “Hello we are at Computer Networks Lab” Display suitable error 
message in case the file is not present in the server.  
 
 
Part B: Simulation Using NS-2 
 
1. Simulate three nodes point-to-point networks with simplex links between them. Apply UDP 
agent, set the queue size and vary the bandwidth and find the number of UDP packets sent, 
received and dropped.  
 
2. Simulate three nodes point-to-point networks with duplex links between them. Apply TCP 
agent, set the queue size and vary the bandwidth and find the number of  
i. TCP packets sent, received and dropped  
             ii.Acknowledgment packets sent and received  
 
3. Simulate a four-node point-to-point network, and connect the links as follows: n0->n2, n1-
>n2 and n2->n3. Apply TCP agent between n0->n3 and UDP agent between n1->n3 agent. 
Changing the parameters, determine the number of –  
i. UDP packets sent, received and dropped  
ii. TCP packets sent, received and dropped  
iii. Acknowledgment packets sent and received.  
 
4. Simulate a ring topology network with four nodes (n0, n1, n2 and n3). Apply one UDP agent 
between n0->n2 and another UDP agent between n1->n3 agent. Changing the parameters, 
determine the number of UDP packets sent, received and dropped.  
 
5. Simulate a star topology network where four nodes (n0, n1, n2 and n3) are connected to 
central hub. Apply one TCP agent between n0->n2 and another TCP agent between n1->n3 
agent. Changing the parameters, determine the number of -  
i. TCP packets sent, received and dropped.  
ii. Acknowledgment packets sent and received.  
  
Text Book: 
1. Behrouz A. Forouzan  – “Data Communications and Networking”, 5th Edition, 2017, 
Tata McGraw- Hill  
 
Reference Books: 
1. NS2 manual - https://networksimulator2.com/ns2-manual/  
2. Alberto Leon-Garcia and Indra Widjaja  – “Communication Networks –Fundamental 
Concepts and Key architectures”, Second Edition, Tata McGraw-Hill.  
3. William Stallings – “Data and Computer Communication”, Eight Edition, Pearson 
Education.  
 
Course Outcomes(COs): 
At the end of the course, the student will be able to: 
1. Design and implement the functionalities of different layers of the OSI model. (PO-1, 
2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 9, 11; PSO-2)  
2. Simulate and analyze the network behavior against different parameters using NS2. 
(PO-1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 9, 11; PSO-2)  
3. Interpret the results and produce the substantial document. (PO-8, 9, 11; PSO-2) 
=== Page 41 ===
 
37 
 
 
Course Assessment and Evaluation: 
Continuous Internal Evaluation (CIE): 50 Marks 
Assessment Tool Marks Course Outcomes Attained 
Internal Test 20 CO1, CO2, CO3 
             Other Components     
Weekly Evaluation 20 CO1, CO2, CO3 
Case Study 10 CO1, CO2, CO3 
The Final CIE out of 50 Marks = Marks Scored in Lab Test + Marks of Lab Record + Case 
Study 
Semester-End Examination 
(SEE) 
50 
 CO1, CO2, CO3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 